[DRAFT]: Feature threshold 2 (#4)
buffalojoec/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/feature-threshold-automation.md

---
simd: 'XXXX'
title: Feature Gate Threshold Automation
authors:
  - Tyera Eulburg
  - Joe Caulfield
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2024-01-25
feature: (fill in with feature tracking issues once accepted)
---

## Summary

This SIMD outlines a proposal for automating the feature activation process
based on a stake-weighted support threshold, rather than manual human action.

With this new process, contributors would no longer have to assess stake support

> for a feature before activation. Instead, this would be done by the runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this new process, contributors no longer have to assess stake support
for a feature before activation. Instead, the assessment is done by the runtime.
```

it is safe to activate. This is obviously brittle and subject to human error.

If instead the runtime was to assess this stake support for activating a
feature, this would eliminate the key-holder's responsibility to asses stake
support, reducing the risk of human error.

In a world where multiple clients will aim to push features and seek to agree on
their activation, a more automated and secure process will be extremely
beneficial.

## New Terminology

- **Feature Gate program:** The Core BPF program introduced in
  [SIMD 0089](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/89)
  that will own all feature accounts.
- **Staged Features PDA:** The PDA under the Feature Gate program used to track
  features submitted for activation for a particular epoch.
- **Support Signal PDA:** The PDA under the Feature Gate program used to store
  a bit mask of the staged features a node supports.
- **Feature Tombstone:** A static address with no on-chain account for assigning
  accounts under, effectively "archiving" them and removing them from the
  Feature Gate program's owned accounts.

## Detailed Design

> The proposed new process would be comprised of the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new process is comprised of the following steps:
```

1. **Feature Creation:** Contributors create feature accounts with the Solana

>    CLI as they do now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Feature Creation:** Contributors create feature accounts as they do now.
```

2. **Staging Features for Activation:** In some epoch 0, the multi-signature

>    authority stages created features for activation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Staging Features for Activation:** In some epoch N, a multi-signature
   authority stages for activation some or all of the features created in step 1.
```

> 3. **Signaling Support for Staged Features:** During the next epoch (epoch 1),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Signaling Support for Staged Features:** During the next epoch (epoch N+1),
```

   validators signal which of the staged feature-gates they support in their
   software.

> 4. **Activation and Garbage Collection:** On the next epoch boundary, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Activation and Garbage Collection:** At the end of epoch N+1, the
```

   runtime activates the feature-gates that have the necessary stake support.
   At the same time, the runtime also removes spam and archives activated
   feature accounts.

### Step 1: Feature Creation

The first step in the new process shall consist of the already existing method
for creating new features using the Solana CLI (`solana feature activate`). This

> command could possibly be renamed to `solana feature create`.

Reviewer: I think I would remove references to the CLI here, as the CLI is an implementation detail. It doesn't matter how a user creates a feature account. Essentially just remove this entire paragraph.

> This command sends a transaction containing System instructions to fund,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step is creation of a feature account, done by submitting a transaction containing System instructions to fund,
```

allocate, and assign the feature account to
`Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111`. This can be performed by anyone.

> This step merely creates a feature, but will no longer stage it for activation.

Reviewer: I think we can remove this as well.

### Step 2: Staging Features for Activation

A multi-signature authority shall be created to stage features for activation.
This multi-signature will comprise key-holders from Solana Labs and possibly
from other validator client teams in the future. In the future, this authority

> could be replaced by validator governance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A multi-signature authority, comprising key-holders from Solana Labs and possibly
other validator client teams in the future, will have the authority to stage created features for activation.
In the future, this authority could be replaced by validator governance.
```

The multi-signature authority stages a feature for activation by invoking the

> Feature Gate program's `StageFeatureForActivation` instruction, which verifies

Reviewer: I know you explicitly dropped the instruction-layout stubs, but I think we should probably define in prose the accounts and data that the instruction expects. Maybe before "which verifies", which could become something like: "The processor for this instruction must verify..."

the signature of the multi-signature authority, then adds the feature ID to the
**next epoch's** Staged Features PDA.

The Staged Features PDA for a given epoch stores a list of all feature IDs that

> were staged for activation during the previous epoch. To start, this list shall

Reviewer: ```suggestion
were staged for activation during the previous epoch. This list shall
```

have a maximum length of 8 (ie. `[Pubkey; 8]`).

The proposed seeds for deriving the Staged Features PDA are provided below,
where the `<epoch>` represents the epoch during which the contained feature IDs
will be assessed for stake support and potentially activated at the end of that

> epoch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where the `<epoch>` is the epoch during which the contained feature IDs
will be assessed for stake support and considered for activation.
```

```
"staged_features" + <epoch>
```

### Step 3: Signaling Support for Staged Features

With an on-chain reference point to determine the features staged for activation
for a particular epoch, nodes can signal their support for the staged features
supported by their software.

A node signals its support for staged features by invoking the Feature Gate
program's `SignalSupportForStagedFeatures` instruction, which requires a  

> `u8` bit mask of the staged features.

Reviewer: Same comment about expected accounts and data, ie. make more clear that the "`u8` bit mask of the staged features" is expected data.

A `1` bit represents support for a feature. For example, for staged features
`[A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H]`, if a node wishes to signal support for all features
except `E` and `H`, their `u8` value would be 246, or `11110110`.

A node's submitted bit mask is then stored in a Support Signal PDA derived from
that node's vote address. The proposed seeds are defined below.

```
"support_signal" + <vote_address>
```

> Nodes shall send this instruction at some arbitrary point during the epoch at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nodes should send a transaction containing this instruction at some arbitrary point during the epoch at
```

Author: You don't really like "shall" do you? 😂

Reviewer: Haha, I am realizing that about myself ;)
However, in this particular case, I had just read rfc2119 (due to Trent's prompting on my SIMD), and I think "should" is actually the correct word.

Signal PDA to read their bit mask, and tallies up the total stake support for
each staged feature. The runtime will also zero-out each bit mask, resetting
each Support Signal PDA for the next epoch.

Only features whose stake support meets the required threshold are activated.
This threshold shall be set to 95% initially, but future iterations on the
process could allow feature key-holders to set a custom threshold per-feature.

If a feature is not activated, either because it has been revoked or it did not
meet the required stake support, it must be resubmitted according to Step 2.

To ensure this new process doesn't overload the Feature Gate program's owned
accounts, during the activation stage, garbage collection will:

- Archive any activated feature accounts
- Archive this epoch's Staged Features PDA
- Delete any spam feature accounts with no state. These are accounts owned by
  `Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111` that do not appear in the
  feature set.

The runtime "archives" an account by assigning it to the Feature Tombstone.

Created features that were not staged for activation or did not meet the

> required stake support will not be garbage collected.

Reviewer: This seems to contradict the 3rd bullet point, because I think features not staged for activation will be feature accounts with no state owned by the Feature Gate program, right?

Author: Hm, maybe I should be more clear on the third bullet and here. The only reliable way to isolate spam would be to check against the feature set listed in the SDK. I think there's no reason a real feature ID would exist outside of that list, right? If so, then this gets a little tricky to garbage collect.

Reviewer: Perhaps I don't understand your intent. I thought you were considering as spam anything that did not get staged during the epoch.
I don't think we should depend on the feature set listed in the SDK for any kind of assessment of the accounts, since we're trying to divorce the activation process from that list. I think we want the behavior here to be the same for all nodes, even if a feature isn't present in the client software (yet).

Author: Makes sense. Sounds like the best way to identify garbage features is to require the minimum deposit you've suggested. The question is... how much? 👀

Author: Without the deposit, we can't reasonably identify a feature account as spam, because legitimate features created by anyone will have the same size and rent lamports. No state.

Reviewer: Right. We either need to leave all of these empty feature accounts or clean them all up at the epoch boundary. Since it won't grief the staging process and is consistent with the current state of things, I'm leaning toward the first option.

Author: Wait, it sounds like you're saying don't even bother with garbage collection?

Reviewer: We should definitely consider not bothering.
Right now, anyone can create a keypair and fund and assign the account at that pubkey to some random program, as long as the amount they fund is >= the rent-exempt minimum for an empty account. So defunding such feature program accounts doesn't really do much to prevent spam in the grand scheme of things. The only reason to do it is if we need to scan all feature accounts for something, or if having spam feature accounts prevents some action we want to take on legitimate accounts. Afaict, our current design avoids both of these things.

Reviewer: That said, we could always implement garbage collection of such accounts later. And since the accounts are owned by the feature program, we could actually support a manual cleanup with just an upgrade to the Feature Gate program.

Author: Ok yeah that sounds good to me. If we don't have a direct need to garbage collect, let's take it out. It reduces complexity and compute.

I agree, in our proposal here and the current runtime implementation we don't load the Feature Gate accounts en masse. I was curious if we did this in the runtime, but this appears to be the feature set's entrypoint for a `Bank` instance:

https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/daa2449ad4b4dc0cc83a4be1968653815e2e4a8c/runtime/src/bank.rs#L1024

https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/blob/daa2449ad4b4dc0cc83a4be1968653815e2e4a8c/sdk/src/feature_set.rs#L1021

Reviewer: To be clear, I do still think we should "archive" activated features and the staged features PDAs.

Author: Agreed, just not the potentially "spam" feature accounts.

of cluster stake when it is activated, or else it risks partitioning the
network. The current feature-gate system comprises two steps:

1. An individual key-holder queues a feature gate for activation
2. The runtime automatically activates the feature on the next epoch boundary

The key-holder is the one who *manually* (with the help of the solana-cli)
assesses the amount of stake that recognizes the feature and decides whether
it is safe to activate. This is obviously brittle and subject to human error.

If instead the runtime was to assess this stake support for activating a
feature, this would eliminate the key-holder's responsibility to asses stake
support, reducing the risk of human error.

## New Terminology

- **Feature Gate program:** The Core BPF program introduced in
  [SIMD 0089](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/89)
  that will own all feature accounts.
- **Staged Features PDA:** The PDA under the Feature Gate program used to track
  features submitted for activation for a particular epoch.
- **Support Signal PDA:** The PDA under the Feature Gate program used to store

>   a bit mask of the staged features a node supports.

Reviewer: Based on my experience with SIMD 0106, I think we'll need to define the addresses of these PDAs somewhere in this proposal. This will help clarify why the Staged Features PDA of one epoch (which validators are currently considering for support) doesn't collide with the Staged Features PDA of the next epoch (which is being actively added to as features are staged).

- **Feature Tombstone PDA:** The PDA under the Feature Gate program used to
  assign accounts to, effectively "archiving" them and removing them from the

>   Feature Gate program's owned accounts.

Reviewer: Why does this need to be a PDA? Seems like some other static program id would be sufficient.

Author: I was thinking in case we needed write-access to these accounts from the program context sometime in the future. If not, or if you think we can solve that another way with the runtime, sure this can be static!

Reviewer: I don't think using a PDA address as the program-id will work like that; the accounts would have to still be owned by the Feature Gate program for that program to write to them.
We'll need to either use runtime overrides or deploy a new core BPF program to operate on accounts owned by something other than the Feature Gate program.

Author: Ah yeah true. In that case, what is the process for reserving a static address? We would need to put it in the SDK somewhere, right? And would it just be something like `FeatureTombstone11111..`?

Reviewer: Yeah, we would define it wherever the Feature Gate program id is defined. I don't know if that stays in solana-sdk (probably) or moves to some core-bpf repo.

from other validator client teams in the future. In the future, this authority
could be replaced by validator governance.

The transaction to submit a feature activation shall contain the necessary
System Program instructions to fund, allocate, and assign the feature account
to `Feature111111111111111111111111111111111111`, as well as the Feature Gate
program's instruction `SubmitFeatureForActivation`.

The `SubmitFeatureForActivation` instruction verifies the signature of the
multi-signature authority, then adds the submitted feature ID to the **next
epoch's** Staged Features PDA.

The Staged Features PDA for a given epoch stores a list of all feature IDs that
were submitted prior to that epoch. To start, this list shall have a maximum
length of 5.

### Step 2: Signaling Support for Staged Features

With an on-chain reference point to determine the features staged for activation
for a particular epoch, nodes can signal their support for the staged features
supported by their software.

A node signals its support for staged features by invoking the Feature Gate
program's `SignalSupportForStagedFeatures` instruction, which requires a  

> `[u8; 5]` bit mask of the staged features. Each element of the bit mask is

Reviewer: It's not really a "bit" mask if you're using a full byte for each item. Use just one byte instead? This would allow us up to 255 features, if we change the limit in the future. That seems like more than enough.

Author: Sure, `u8` will work! Do you think the cap of 5 for now makes sense? I sort of pulled out an arbitrary number to gauge interest in the proper cap.

Reviewer: I'm fine with using 5 to start with, and we can see what people think. Up to you, but you could mention the fact that the cap could be raised up to 255 if we feel a lot more aggressive about activations in the future.

Author: Btw, I think this would actually cap us at 8 features, ie `11111111`, since the ordering of staged features may not correlate with software versioning. Someone might signal support for 4 of 8 features and send a `10101010`.

Reviewer: Oh duh, sorry, that's right. Maybe just change the proposal to cap at 8, then?

activate this feature if its corresponding feature account no longer exists
on-chain.

### Step 3: Activation and Garbage Collection

During the epoch rollover, the runtime uses the validator support signals to
determine which staged features to activate.

To do this, the runtime walks all of the vote accounts, derives their Support
Signal PDA to read their bit mask, and tallies up the total stake support for
each staged feature. The runtime will also zero-out each bit mask, resetting
each Support Signal PDA for the next epoch.

Only features whose stake support meets the required threshold are activated.
This threshold shall be set to 95% initially, but future iterations on the
process could allow feature key-holders to set a custom threshold per-feature.

If a feature is not activated, either because it has been revoked or it did not
meet the required stake support, it must be resubmitted according to Step 1.

To ensure this new process doesn't overload the Feature Gate program's owned
accounts, during the activation stage, garbage collection will:

- Archive any activated feature accounts
- Archive this epoch's Staged Features PDA

> - Delete any spam feature accounts with no state

Reviewer: I think this one needs a little more explanation. Might not be spam, just a feature that didn't get staged this epoch.

Author: Good shout. Based on our convo offline about creating vs. staging, this section will need a little touching up.

The runtime "archives" an account by assigning it to the Feature Tombstone PDA.

### Conclusion

This new process provides additional safeguards for submitting features for
activation as well as an automated stake support threshold check before
activating them. This greatly reduces the risk of human error when enabling new
functionality on the network, as well as minimizes the risk of cluster
partitioning.

Additionally, this system makes use of on-chain data and a client-agnostic BPF
program to perfom its duties, further decentralizing the feature activation
process.

These enhancements will be especially useful in a world where multiple clients

> will aim to push features and seek to agree on their activation.

Reviewer: I think I would remove this section and split the content between Motivation, Impact, and Security Considerations. (Although I think you already say some of this there)

## Alternatives Considered

## Impact

This new process for activating features directly impacts core contributors and
validators.

Core contributors will no longer bear the responsibility of ensuring the proper
stake supports their feature activation. However, it will change the process

> by which they can override this stake requirement to push a feature through.

Reviewer: What is the process to override the stake requirement? (I don't think there is one yet?)

Author: Yeah I intentionally left it out. If you want it in here we can add it, but conceptually it would probably be some additional `Feature` state, or something similar the program can write.

Reviewer: In the interest of honesty, I think say that under this proposal, there is no way to override the stake requirement, but that could/should be proposed separately...?
